>> And God made the beast
of the Earth after his kind,
and cattle after their kind, and
everything that creepeth upon
the Earth after his kind--
and God saw that it was good.
And God said, let us make man in
our image, after our likeness.
So God created man
in his own image,
male and female he created them.
Once man looked to
God and higher beings
to understand his
nature and origin.
According to Genesis,
God created man and woman
from the dust of the Earth,
about 6,000 years ago.
But when man started to dig
in the dust of the Earth,
he found bones and
implements that appeared
to tell another story--
evolution.
These ideas were formulated
by Charles Darwin in his book,
"Origin of Species."
In this book, Darwin did not
say much about human evolution,
only that much light would be
thrown on the origin of man
and its history.
This brief remark set off
a revolution in thought.
And by the 1870s, the
belief in the origin
of man by evolution
from ape-like ancestors
had become dominant among
scientists and academics
throughout the Western world.
In the years following
the publication
of the "Origin of Species,"
various scientists
began drawing family trees
showing how the human species
evolved from lower animals.
This particular tree was drawn
by the German naturalist, Ernst
Haeckel.
The only problem
with this picture
was that there was precious
little evidence to support it.
At first, they had
only Neanderthal man
to fill in the gaps.
Too human-like and too
recent to be a missing link.
But scientist committed
to Darwinian evolution
expected that fossils
of a genuine ape man,
sufficiently ancient,
would soon be found.
In fact, Haeckel
commissioned this painting,
showing exactly how
he should appear.
He called him Pithecanthropus
alalus, the speechless ape man.
And scientists were
not disappointed.
Fossils said to represent a
whole series of intermediates
were discovered over the
next several decades.
Here is the picture
that emerged.
In 1894, the Dutch
physician, Eugene Dubois,
discovered a primitive skull
and thigh bone in Java.
Thus realizing that dream
of Haeckel's Pithecanthropus
alalus.
Today, Java man along with
Peking Man and other specimens
is known as Homo erectus.
Homo erectus is thought to
have lived from 1.6 million
to 300,000 years ago.
Modern man, represented
by Cro-Magnon man,
is thought to have
first appeared
about 40,000 years ago.
Neanderthal man, now
generally thought
to be an offshoot from the
main line of human evolution,
existed from 150,000
to 35,000 years ago.
In the 1920s, a South
African scientist
found the first
specimen of the creature
now called Australopithecus,
a small erect ape-like being
thought to represent the
human lineage at two to three
million years ago.
In the 1950s, Lewis
and Mary Leakey
discovered Homo
habilis, an intermediate
between Australopithecus
and Homo erectus.
According to the
current scenario,
the initial stages of evolution
from Australopithecus to Homo
erectus took place in Africa.
Homo erectus then left
Africa and spread widely
throughout the tropical
and temperate latitudes
of the old world.
Somewhere in this
broad region, it
is believed Homo erectus
evolved into Homo sapiens.
Homo sapiens completely
replaced Homo erectus
and moved on into the northern
regions of the old world.
No more than 20,000
years ago, Homo sapiens
is thought to have
crossed into North America
and populated the new world.
This is the standard
scenario of human evolution.
But over the past 150
years, much evidence
has been discovered
that radically
contradicts this picture.
At all ages in this picture
of fossil history and even
earlier, scientists
have found evidence
for the presence
of Homo sapiens.
What is this evidence?
And why have so few
people have heard of it?
First of all, we
should understand
that our whole picture
of man's prehistoric past
is based on four kinds of
physical evidence-- stone
tools, incised bones,
human skeletal remains,
and other artifacts.
A stone tool like this one
from a site in Torralba, Spain
may look like an ordinary rock.
But experts in
lithic technology can
identify the chipping
and fracturing
as the product of human work.
In a similar
fashion, experts can
tell the difference between
marks made by animal teeth
and those made by flint
tools on fossil bones.
This cut bone was found
at a Cro-Magnon site.
This Co-Magnon skeleton
was unearthed in France
during the 19th century.
Most paleoanthropologists
would not
expect such skeletons
of modern human type
to be older than 40,000 years.
Scientists interested
in human prehistory
also study artifacts, such as
paintings, statues, carvings,
and pottery, which they tend
to regard as very recent.
But now let's investigate
the large body of evidence
in these categories
that contradicts
the modern picture
of man's origins,
starting with that
found in Europe.
In the 1850s, Carlos
Ribeiro, the head
of the Geological
Survey of Portugal,
found these tools in the Miocene
strata of the Tagus River
Valley near Lisbon.
To get some idea
of the astounding
age of Ribeiro's discoveries,
let's look at a chart
of the geological ages.
The Miocene extends from
five to 25 million years ago.
At present, the most
primitive accepted stone tools
all lie within the Pleistocene,
being at most two million years
old.
Tools of the type
discovered by Ribeiro
when Miocene formations
are generally
found in the upper Pleistocene
and are characteristic of fully
modern man.
At present, extinct apes
are the highest primates
assigned to the Miocene.
Then what made Ribeiro's tools?
Are they really artifacts or
are they products of nature?
Let's compare a barrow's tool
with an accepted stone tool
made by Neanderthal man
in the late Pleistocene,
less than 100,000 years ago.
On both, large
flakes were removed
in parallel,
something not likely
to occur in the course of random
battering by natural forces.
The opposite sides of both
pieces display additional
features typical of human
work, such as the bulb
of percussion--
caused by a single,
directed blow that removed
the flake from a flint core,
the striking platform--
the surface upon which
the blow was struck,
the eraillure-- a
small chip removed
from the bulb of percussion.
In every respect,
Ribeiro's Miocene tools
resemble those
accepted by scientists
as the product of human work.
Despite such evidence,
many scientists
resisted the conclusion that
human beings manufactured tools
in the Miocene.
At an International Congress
of Archeology and Anthropology
held in Lisbon in 1871, a
commission of scientists
was appointed to examine the
sites of Ribeiro's discoveries.
One member of this commission,
the Italian geologist,
Jay Bellucci, found this
tool in Miocene strata.
All the scientist
present agreed it
was identical to late
Pleistocene scraping tools.
This led some to claim that it
was indeed a late Pleistocene
tool that had been washed into
a Miocene formation from above.
But the tool was
found firmly embedded
in the upper surface of
an overhanging section
of the Miocene layers.
Stone tools, even older
than those of Portugal,
were found by the abbaye
bourgeois at Tenay in France.
Many of the tools were found
embedded in undisturbed
Oligocene formations.
And this indicates an age of
from 25 to 38 million years.
Especially noteworthy,
is the retouching
on the edges of the implements.
This retouching is confined
to one side of the working
edge of the implement.
It is obvious that several
small flakes have been removed
in succession and
most are oriented
in the same general direction.
Such retouching is generally
regarded as a sure sign
of intentional work.
The implements from
the Oligocene of today
display the same features
as this accepted scraper
from an upper Pleistocene
site in France.
Here are more examples
of unifacially
retouched implements
from the Oligocene
at Tenay reproduced from 19th
century scientific journals.
At another site near
Aurillac in southern France,
several scientists
recovered stone
implements from
Miocene formations
during the 19th century.
In 1905, the German
scientist, Max Verworn,
sought to confirm
these discoveries
by conducting his own
excavations at Aurillac.
He personally recovered
these implements
from Miocene formations there.
Here, the cortex, or outer
surface, of the flint
has been removed
from the working
edges, which have been carefully
chipped to form a point.
Scientists, such
as Henri Breuil,
sought to prove the natural
origin of such implements.
An excavation near
Clermont in France, Breuil
found specimens like
these with small chips
of flint lying close
to the parent blocks,
apparently removed by
geological pressure.
Because this occurred
in an Eocene formation,
Breuil believed human work of
any kind could be ruled out.
He was convinced
human beings could not
have existed from 38 to
55 million years ago.
On the basis of
this preconception,
he concluded that all of the
flints resembling tools found
in the same Eocene
stratum had also
been formed by geological
pressure, including this one.
And this one.
In fact, Breuil said
that it was stupefying
to find in an Eocene formation
an implement such as this,
which he said looked exactly
like a late Pleistocene
tool made by Homo sapiens.
But here is an important fact.
Specimens of this
level of sophistication
were not found with
the chips in place.
Just because geological pressure
might have produced effects
like this does not mean it can
produce implements like this,
complete with wear marks
in the appropriate places.
It would thus appear that Breuil
found a genuine human artifact
in an Eocene formation.
On the coast of East
Anglia in England,
Jay Reed More and
other researchers
reported several
intriguing discoveries.
This pointed piece of wood
was recovered from the Cromer
Forest Bed in East Anglia.
The right end has been cut
off flat, as if by sawing.
The Cromer Forest
Bed formation dates
to the latter part of
the early Pleistocene
and is about one to
1.5 million years old.
Jay Reed More noted
that at one spot,
it seems that the
line of cutting
has been corrected, as is
often necessary when sawing.
It is hard to see
how such sawing could
have been accomplished without
tools considered quite modern.
Another discovery was this
carved shell, presented in 1881
by geologist Henry Stokes
to the British Association
for the Advancement of Science.
It was recovered from the
Red Crag Formation, which is
1.5 to two million years old.
It may be recalled that
according to standard opinion,
human beings
capable of such work
did not appear in Europe
before 40,000 years ago.
Below the Red Crag
Formation is a layer
called the detritus bed lying
upon the Eocene London clay.
It is composed of
fossils and sediments
from the Pliocene, Miocene,
and Oligocene periods.
Anything found here could
be anywhere from two to 38
million years old.
Jay Reed More
recovered these bone
implements from the Detritus
Bed below the Red Crag.
The fractures that
formed the points
go across the natural
grain of the bone,
indicating intentional work,
rather than natural breakage.
Also discovered in
the detritus bed
was this round
object characterized
by Henri Breuil, one of
Europe's leading experts
on prehistoric man, as a
sling stone, similar to those
used recently in New Caledonia.
The sling stone was
apparently fashioned
from a clay-like
substance and its surface
shows many parallel
striations indicating shaping
with some sort of implement.
If the current view of
human evolution is accepted,
it is difficult to explain what
sort of being might have made
this object at least two million
and perhaps as much as 38
million years ago.
In middle Miocene
marine formations
on the Northwest
coast of France,
the Abbaye de Lonay discovered
this bone from a halitherium--
an extinct sea mammal.
It bears what appear to be the
cut marks of a sharp implement.
Similar markings are found
on this whale bone recovered
by Jean Cappellini from a
Pliocene formation in Italy.
These cut marks are
distinct from those
that might be made by teeth.
A tooth scraping over
the surface of a bone
typically leaves a
u-shaped depression,
crushing rather than
cutting the bone.
On the other hand,
a sharp flint blade
would leave a narrow v-shaped
incision such as found
on the bones in question.
In his original report
published in the 1870s,
Cappellini provided
this magnified
cross section of a cut mark on
one of his fossil whale bones.
Cappellini methodology was
as sophisticated as that
used by modern scientists.
Thus far, we have been
considering stone tools, cut
bones, and other artifacts that
indicate the presence of man
in very ancient times.
One might ask if there
are any human skeletal
remains from the same period.
The answer is yes.
In the year 1860 at Castenedolo,
Italy on the southern flanks
of the Alps, G. Ragazzoni,
a professor of geology,
discovered human fossils
in a hillside excavation
at the bottom of a
five-foot thick layer
of blue Pliocene clay.
Ragazzoni carefully examined
the overlying layers
and determined they
were undisturbed.
In 1880, the bones of a
fully human man and a child
were discovered some yards
away at the same depth.
Ragazzoni again inspected
the overlying layers
and found them undisturbed.
A short time later,
the bones of a woman
were found at a
slightly higher level.
The overlying layers of
yellow sand and red clay
were undisturbed.
This ruled out the
possibility the bones may
have been introduced
into the Pliocene clay
by burial from above.
The reconstructed skull of
the woman is fully human
and provides excellent
evidence for Homo sapiens
in northern Italy over
two million years ago.
According to modern theory,
present day Homo sapiens
came into being only
40,000 years ago.
Leaving Europe we now
turn our attention
to discoveries in other
parts of the world.
In 1894, Dr. Fritz
Noetling, a paleontologist
with a Geological
Survey of India,
found this implement in the
Miocene formation in Burma.
Dr. Noetling commented
that if this tool were
to be rejected as the product
of natural forces, then almost
all the recognized stone
tools from later periods
should also be rejected.
In the early part
of this century,
some Argentine scientists
discovered stone tools
in the Pliocene
formation at Miramar
on the coast of Argentina,
just south of Buenos Aires.
The formation
contained the bones
of typical Pliocene
mammals making it
over two million years old.
But the Argentine
researcher, Antonio Romero,
insisted that the
formation was quite recent
and that the Pliocene
animal bones had
been washed in from elsewhere.
Carlos Ameghino however,
found in natural connection
the bones of the whole rear
leg of a Pliocene species
of toxodon an extinct
South American mammal.
But this is not likely
to have occurred simply
by the random
movement of the bones
in the currents of streams.
If the bones really
belong together,
that means that a Pliocene
animal died in that place
and that the formation really is
two to five million years old,
as are the stone
tools found there.
And here is a further
interesting fact.
Carlos Ameghino found
embedded in the toxodon femur,
a stone arrowhead.
More evidence for
the presence of
technologically-sophisticated
human beings over two million
years ago in Argentina.
This fully-human skull
was discovered in 1896
by workmen excavating a dry dock
in the harbor of Buenos Aires.
It was found in the
rudder pit of the dry dock
at a depth of about 35 feet
below the bottom of the river,
just after the workmen broke
through a hard limestone-like
layer of tosca.
The sediments in which
the skull was found
are 1.5 to 2.5
million years old.
Some might object
that no scientist
was present at the moment
of discovery by the workmen.
But workmen also discovered
the Heidelberg jaw,
which is fully accepted as
an example of Homo erectus
in the middle
Pleistocene of Europe.
In the 1850s, miners
first panned for gold
in the gravels of
California rivers.
Later, they dug mine
shafts at places
like Table Mountain
in Tuolumne County
in order to get at the
gold-bearing gravels.
The gravels were originally
deposited in rivers
that flowed here
millions of years
ago during the Miocene
period and earlier.
At the end of the Miocene,
volcanic eruptions
covered the entire
area with basalt.
Then, in more recent times,
rivers cut new valleys,
leaving formations like
Table Mountain with deposits
of gold-bearing
gravel now buried
beneath layers of basalt.
In 1877, John H. Neale entered
the Montezuma mine shaft
at Table Mountain.
He proceeded 1,400
to 1,500 feet inside.
Then at the working
end of the shaft,
he discovered in the
undisturbed gold-bearing gravel
this mortar and pestle along
with several stone spearheads.
Neale testified
he saw no fissures
by which the objects could
have entered from above.
The gold-bearing gravels
at Table Mountain
date at least to
the late Miocene
and therefore the objects found
in them would be seven to nine
million years old.
Some modern geologists say
the ancient river channels
are from the Eocene period.
And could thus be as much
as 55 million years old.
Miners made similar discoveries
at dozens of nearby locations.
This mortar and pestle
were found in 1861
in gold-bearing gravels
16 feet below the surface
at Kincaid Flat.
These turned up at
Gold Spring gulch.
And this, 200 feet inside
the Boston Tunnel Company
mine at Table Mountain.
This interesting object
was found in 1864, 16 feet
below the surface in
gold-bearing gravel
at Oregon Bar in Placer County.
These examples, and many others,
were reported by J.D. Whitney,
the state geologist
of California.
Nevertheless, some objected that
they were are hoaxes by miners.
But in 1869, Clarence D. King
of the US Geological Survey
discovered this pestle firmly
in place at Table Mountain.
It is shown alongside
a modern Indian pestle
The American anthropologist,
W. H. Holmes,
rejected the California
finds, mainly
because they did not fit in
with his ideas about evolution.
The discovery of
Java man had put
an ape man in the
middle Pleistocene,
so how could you have
advanced stone tool making
men in the Miocene or Eocene?
According to Holmes, it was
completely out of the question.
Nevertheless, many scientists,
most of them evolutionists,
had discovered abundant
evidence for a human presence
in the Pliocene, Miocene,
and earlier periods.
But with the
discovery of Java man
and later of Australopithecus,
this evidence
disappeared from view,
mostly because it did not
fit into the newly-emerging
scenario of human evolution.
Today, practically no one hasn't
even heard of this evidence.
If you want to
find out about it,
you have to dig into obscure
19th century journals
in many different languages.
Of course, it is
possible to point out
discrepancies in
the evidence that
goes against the current
theory of human evolution.
But the evidence that is
said to support this theory
is also full of discrepancies.
First, let's consider Java man.
Since Dubois made his initial
discovery here at Trinil,
scientists have made many more
finds at other sites in Java.
These fossils are
now categorized along
with the original Java
man as Homo erectus.
In 1978, a standard
textbook gave the Java Homo
erectus fossils potassium argon
dates from 700,000 years to two
million years ago.
A chart in the book
lists 24 discoveries.
Of these, at least 18, or
75%, were found on the surface
or came from unknown
locations and are thus
unsuitable for
potassium argon dating.
14 were initially found
by native collectors.
And four were found at a
museum in Holland 30 years
after their discovery
with no clue
to the original
stratigraphic location.
The potassium argon method
does not date the bone itself,
but rather is used to test
the age of volcanic deposits.
Only if a fossil is found
beneath an undisturbed
layer of volcanic
material, is it
possible to assign it a
date using this method.
Devastating criticism
could have been
brought to bear on
the Java man fossils
because most were found
on the surface at poorly
specified locations by
paid native collectors,
but no such criticism
was leveled.
Instead, scientists simply
dressed up this imperfect
evidence with undeserved
potassium argon dates
that allowed the fossils to be
easily fitted into the accepted
outline of human evolution.
This double standard in
the treatment of evidence
is a general phenomenon.
Let's consider how this
process of selective acceptance
and rejection of evidence
operates in a related field
we have already
briefly touched upon--
the peopling of the new world.
The view now being
vigorously defended
is that Homo sapiens
crossed over from Siberia
not more than 20,000 years ago.
Yet scientists have
discovered a great deal
of evidence suggesting a far
more ancient human presence
in the new world.
Even though this evidence
is comparable in quality
and quantity to
the evidence used
to support the dominant
view, it is rejected
by establishment scientists.
For example, in
1899, Ernest Volk,
a collector for
the Peabody Museum
of Natural History at Harvard
found a Homo sapien's femur
embedded in glacial
strata at Trenton, New.
Jersey the layer in
which the bone was found
is said by the New
Jersey Geological Survey
to be about 107,000 years old.
This small statue found
at Nampa, Idaho in 1889,
came from an encased well
shaft at a depth of 300 feet.
The level at which
it was found is now
dated by the US
Geological Survey
as being between 300 and
two million years old.
The Nampa image is comparable
to the famous Willendorf
Venus, attributed to
Cro-Magnon man in Europe.
Man is not thought to have
made such works of art
until 30,000 years ago.
By the way, the Venus
of Willendorf endure
was found by a road workman.
This coin-like
object was recovered
at a depth of over 100 feet
from a well boring in Illinois.
The Geological
Survey of Illinois
states that the formation
in which it was found
is from 200,000 to
400,000 years old.
The discovery was initially
reported by William E. Dubois
of the Smithsonian Institution.
In the early 1960s, Louis Leakey
located an early man sight
at Calico in Southern
California with stone tools
found in strata dated
at 200,000 years old.
In succeeding years,
thousands of implements
have been recovered
from the Calico site,
including this beaked graver.
If scientists are reluctant to
modify their view concerning
man's entry in
the Americas, they
are even more hesitant
to change their view
that modern man first appeared
within the past 40,000 years
and he borrowed from ape-like
ancestors originating
in Africa.
Evolutionist pride themselves on
having done away with the idea
that man was created 10,000
years ago, but not much
has changed.
The present dominant
view is that human beings
of modern type still
can be dated back
only a few thousand years.
Before that, there
was only primitive man
fading off into ape-like life.
But this film confronts
us with abundant evidence
that human beings
of modern type have
existed for tens of millions
of years into the past,
in geological ages
distant from our own.
[MUSIC PLAYING]